Ongoing negative spiral.
Overharvesting enabled kina to explode.
They stripped the kelp forests, and with the loss of the forests, we lost
the settlement areas for juvenile rock lobster, and we
get a negative spiral.
So in fisheries, if you're interested in the health of our fish stocks,
if you're interested in maximizing economic value from our fisheries,
you simply have to be interested in the state of the marine environment.
And these reforms that seek to sideline environmental matters are
extremely misguided and need to be ditched.
More flexible ACE setting. EDS is not opposed to
increasing agility through mechanisms such as multi-year ACE
and management procedures.
However, they need to be applied with care, should only be applied to
high information stocks, so we've got good information, and they need to
be monitored to make sure they're not going off track.
We've seen management procedures go very wrong in the past, particularly for
scallops and rock lobster stocks, and we need to ensure that those
mistakes are not repeated.
Alternative deemed value rates.
The slight addition to the bill that favors deepwater freezer
vessels harvesting our inshore stocks and selling them
frozen for a lower return, to the detriment of our inshore
fleet, which is producing a higher value fresh catch,
is self-serving, not in the public interest, and needs to be deleted.
Confidentiality of camera recordings.
There's no evidence of a problem here, and certainly not one of
sufficient gravity to justify a carve-out from the Official Information
Act, which is a very important part of our constitutional
arrangements. And the penalties are also far too harsh.
Time limit for judicial review.
There are no appeal rights under the Fisheries Act, and arguably there should be.
So judicial review is the only mechanism that provides a check and
balance over ministerial decision-making.
Restricting the time limit for lodgement to 20 working days is
unreasonable and arguably infringes on the right to justice.
And finally, discard rules.
We've not included
discard rules in our submissions because we know that many other parties have
focused on this aspect of the bill.
However, we'd like to put on record that EDS considers a
landing requirement to be the preferable way forward, as it
incentivizes bycatch reduction, reduces wastage,
and encourages the development of markets for less populous
species. And this, in turn, will result in more value
from our fisheries.
So overall, EDS sees little merit in the bill, and we're asking
MPs to withdraw it or vote it down at the second reading.
Instead, we need a proper fix of the system.
We need to fix the actual problems.
The problems are deep-seated and they're interconnected, and there are actually no
quick fixes.
And what we need is a proper, independent inquiry into the system
so we can really understand fully what the problems
are, and we can develop a set of reforms that will actually bring our
1980s fisheries system into the modern age.
And for a more in-depth description of the problems that we actually need
to deal with, I would encourage members to read Voices from the Sea, is our
report on the 2018 review, and it's available on the EDS
website. Thank you for listening. Happy to take questions.
Yeah, thanks, Raymond. We've got a first question here with Rachel Boyack.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Raymond.
I'm keen to understand your position, because it's not clear from your written
submission on ACE carryover.
Because if I look at pages 21, 22, on page 22
you've raised your concerns around
extreme natural events having an impact on a fishery stock.
We heard two good examples this morning from Mark,
from Rock Lobster
Industry about two examples, one where
there was a carryover due to COVID and one where there wasn't
because of Cyclone Gabrielle. So they both seemed, in the context, to be good
decisions.
I'm just interested in your thoughts on there's other reasons, not just
natural disasters, where you might look for an ACE carryover.
If there are some times when you could see that as being beneficial
without having an impact on the fishery stock.
When you looked at the risk and the sort of
explanation around that, it talked about natural disasters and then
adverse market conditions, I suppose, when you
couldn't
sell the stock.
Which was COVID.
Yeah. Or COVID.
Heaven forbid we end up there.
And I think the point is natural disaster seems the very case when you
don't want to enable carryover.
Market conditions, I think it's just too
open because if you carryover 100%, 80%, you're
suddenly harvesting double the amount the following year.
And you can sort of make an assumption, well, they got a rest the year
before, but it is
increasing pressure, and I don't know that we necessarily have the
information to know whether to ensure it's sustainable.
So it just seems very open-ended. I think
it needs to be exceptional. There needs to be a limit on the amount that can
be carried over. It shouldn't be applied in natural disasters or when the marine
environment's been under pressure through Cyclone Gabrielle. Yeah.
I guess my question is,
if though you could actually show through good information that there wasn't
going to be an impact on sustainability of the
stock-And potentially there was a limitation, so not
the opportunity for a full 100% carry forward.
Can you see why there could be some merit in doing this if
you had a scenario where it wasn't going to affect sustainability of the
stock?
Well, if we know that, and I think we already
can carry over 10%. So,
you may kind of expand that a bit. But yeah, I just think it's
too loose. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Susan's got a sup on that.
Oh, yeah, because one of the examples that was given to us by a submitter this
morning actually was the fuel crisis.
So if the price of diesel gets too much higher, there'll be fishers
that won't be able to go out. They won't be able to afford to take their boats out.
So can you see that being a possible
inclusion?
Well, yeah. I think my point is
this needs to be very carefully constrained.
The amount that can be carried over needs to be less than
100%, and there needs to be real surety
that it's not going to have a negative impact on the stock or the marine
environment.
So it's a matter of checks and balances and
just making sure that
it's well controlled.
Okay.
Thanks, Rowan. We're moving now to Steve Abel.
Yeah. Thank you, Rowan, very much for an excellent substantive
submission.
I'll
ask you a few questions at once and you can deal with them as you like.
But landing bycatch,
understanding your arguments for why it acts as a
punitive measure to disincentivize catching undersized fish and so
forth, or fish that aren't wanted.
Isn't there a risk that
we create an economic value in those undersized fish?
You don't have to respond to that straight away.
And how do you manage that risk, apart from the clear double standard that
is concerning direct fishers?
And then the other point is, broadly in terms of
this legislation, some people have told us we just need to throw the
entire thing out. Are you of that view or do you think there are specific
things in here that are meritorious?
Or would it actually be better if we didn't
pass these amendments? That's my second question.
And my third one is can you explain to us from page
18 where you point out
the long recognized fact by stakeholders
that despite management procedures, there was indications that the catch
limit needed to change.
But the industry was too late to notice that, even though it was
obvious to others outside of having a vested interest in the
catch limit remaining the same. Can you explain how we deal
with that problem, that industry tends every time to be
optimistic about what the fishery can handle?
Sure. Undersized fish, I understood
from the public announcements by government that those provisions were being
withdrawn and that there was going to be
bill. So I'm not sure if that position's changed.
So
I understood that there had been a retreat on that point and that had been
announced publicly.
We don't have it in-
Certainly you don't want to be selling undersized fish.
Yep.
No, there are a few
odd good things in this bill. As I said, things like
more flexible ACE setting. The trouble is there's
not enough check and balances in the bill.
So the bill as it is I don't think really helps and I think it
needs to be
binned and then we need to start again.
And we need to deal with the really significant problems with the system,
which this doesn't do.
Yeah, so that's really our focus on that.
The management procedures. So in theory, a management
procedure is quite a good thing because we know that for many stocks, the
TAC has not changed. So the system is very
ossified. It takes too long to respond to issues.
And many stocks have languished and haven't really had any attention.
We know the TAC is under court, and we don't know whether that's
because the stock's in trouble or because
there's not enough economic value in it or whatever.
So it's pretty concerning. So the idea of having an automatic
adjustment that worked well is a good idea.
But the problem is, because it's automatic, you have to get it
right. You're trying to link
the state of the fish stock with some piece of information that you're
getting, and typically that's catch per unit effort because that's something we
know. We get that information off the boats.
They're recording their catch and they're recording how often they put out their
lines or put down their pots.
So that information is fairly readily available.
And so these management procedures in the past have tried to link catch per unit
effort with stock status. And they've gone pear-shaped
because there isn't a good link because fishers are always
adjusting their behavior depending on the abundance of stock and where they are
and what's happening. Because they
have to maintain their catch rate to make a living.
And so,
it's well recognized in the literature that CPUE is not a reliable
indicator of stock status. And so I think if we're going
to use management procedures, they need to be based on something better than that.
We need to have assurance that there is a relationship that we can rely
on. But I think it needs to be carefully monitored.
So it needs to be reviewed every year by an independent scientist or
someone who can make sure from all the
data that we've got, it looks like it's on track.
Because with the scallops, the scallops had collapsed and the management procedure
was sort of saying it was okay because the catch per unit
effort just didn't relate to the status of the stock.
So that's the danger with it, and the bill doesn't include any checks and
balancesIt could be applied to a low information stock from my
reading. A stock that we really don't even have the information to know what the
status.
The last thing you want is an automatic procedure managing that stock.
It should only be applied if we've got good information about the stock
status, we've got good information about the
relationship between that and the data we have, and that we monitor it.
Thank you. Excellent.
Thank you very much, Raewyn, for your submission.
Thank you, Raewyn.
Yeah.
The committee will consider it during the course of deliberations.
So thanks for your time this afternoon.
Thank you. Bye.
Thank you.
Right. Moving on. We now have Seafood New
Zealand.
Would ask if you're going to ask a question, Steve, please just ask while we talk.
Sure. Sorry.
Would the committee be comfortable with one of our staff members taking a couple of
photos of us while we're submitting?
Yeah, that's fine. As long as they're taking of us as well.
So you'll be in it. Don't worry.
Susan only wants that side taken.
So welcome to the committee.
Great. Thank you so much, guys.
The time is yours.
Fabulous. Well, kia ora koutou. Ko Lisa Fuiche Koho.
I'm the Chief Executive at Seafood New Zealand.
We are the peak body for New Zealand's wild caught
finfish commercial fisheries.
Now you've received our submission, it's substantive,
and just wanted to let you know that we've worked with our members and the wider
industry to really try to put to you comprehensive
feedback on the bill.
We've been as succinct as possible, but we do want to acknowledge that fisheries
management is complex and it is technical, and for that
reason, we want to make sure that we leave as much time as possible for you to
ask us questions. That's going to be really, really important.
So I'm going to cover off some key points before opening up for those questions.
And I've got with me Tiff Bock and Tama Wells,
both experts at Seafood New Zealand on fisheries management more
generally, but also this bill specifically.
So they will be available for those questions.
But can I start by saying that this bill really is about looking
after our fisheries so that they work for everyone.
Our fisheries belong to all New Zealanders.
It's a shared resource, so ensuring that they remain healthy and
abundant is a priority for us all. The commercial fishing industry, and
this is just stating the obvious, we are absolutely dependent on
sustainable fish stocks for our livelihoods, for our businesses, for employment in
the regions, and also for being able to contribute economically to New
Zealand through sourcing local, fresh,
really good, healthy protein for our whanau and also for
consumers further afield. So all of those are reasons
why we strongly support this bill.
I have to say, we have been concerned at the volume of incorrect,
misleading information that has been circulating about this bill.
And it's really detracted from the quality of the debate, and that's a real
disappointment for us. So I just want to be really clear upfront that there are a
range of things that the bill does not do, and this is covered off in our
submission, and we're happy to take questions on it.
Despite what you have heard, it does not lower the bar on environmental
rules. It does not change the fact that sustainability
remains a cornerstone of the QMS and of sustainable
fisheries management.
It does not reduce transparency or withhold information from the
public, nor does it reduce or remove public consultation.
And really importantly, it does not prioritize the commercial
sector
over any other rights or interests.
Now, if you are being told any of these things, I urge you please interrogate
them strongly. Do so through the officials or through actual experts,
because we really, really do need the facts to prevail.
We urge you to focus on the substance and the merit of the reforms themselves
rather than the noise surrounding them, and there has been a lot of noise.
In several cases, including on minimal legal sizes, the
public narrative simply has not reflected what is actually
proposed by the bill. So this bill is
the natural next step in a reform program that has been
ongoing since 2016 to modernize how New Zealand
manages its fisheries. Over the last decade, government and
industry have made significant investments in fisheries through the
rollout of electronic reporting, geospatial tracking,
onboard cameras across our commercial fleet.
That investment has fundamentally changed the game.
We now have access to timely, accurate, and
independently verifiable data and information about what
is happening on the water.
It replaces the uncertainty of the old system.
So the question is no longer whether we have better information,
it's about whether we are fully using it, and the bill enables us
to do just that.
By enabling more responsive and evidence-based management tools,
it better allows us to react when things change.
The benefits flow to everyone and put simply, this bill
helps New Zealand realize the full return on a major public and
private investment, and it delivers on the original promise of that
investment, which is better information will lead to better fisheries management
for all. Now I'm just going to highlight three top priorities that we have in the
bill. First one, management procedures, and we've heard Raewyn's views on that this
morning. Really pleased to hear that in principle she supports this.
The proposal to enable the use of management procedures brings us up to speed with
global best practice, and that's a great thing.
They are used extensively to manage migratory species globally because
they allow for all interested parties to know in advance what the outcome will
be based on signals seen in monitoring.
Now, a good example of this is the management procedure used in the Southern
Bluefin Tuna fishery, and we've put this in our submission.
The Regional Fisheries Management Organization uses a rule called the Barley
procedure, which adjusts the tuna catch limit
automatically based on the measures of how many fish are being caught
and how many juveniles are coming throughTogether, these data
points automatically determine the total allowable catch.
So that, in a nutshell, is a management procedure.
It provides certainty, responsiveness.
If we see this signal in the fishery, then this will be our response.
Currently, we set catch limits, and they can go without review for
decades. Management procedures could change a catch limit each
year in response to fishery signals.
But importantly, and this actually goes to something that Raewyn wanted and said
was absent, not quite correct, because sustainability safeguards
make sure that if the management procedure isn't working, the
minister must pause and consult. So, that is the safeguard that
is built into this bill.
You may hear that management procedures remove the ability for public
to have their say. That's just simply not the case.
Public consultation remains a cornerstone of the Fisheries Act, and as
I've just described, the public will be able to have their say on
how we respond if we see signals of decline or
of increase, rather than arguing over what we do once
those signals have already happened.
So, the consultation is right up front and frankly, it's significantly more
meaningful. Second area, monitored returns.
These allow us to derive value from having fully monitored fisheries.
Cameras can verify what is caught while at sea, enabling fishers to return
some fish to the marine ecosystem if it cannot be sold.
You may hear that more fish will be thrown overboard as a result of this
change. That simply isn't the case.
Commercial fishers are not in the business of throwing fish away.
Fish returned to the sea under monitored returns would be balanced against annual
catch entitlement. In other words, the fisher would pay for it.
So this retains the strong incentive to fishers to avoid catching
what they cannot sell. And finally, the third area, camera footage
protection. Highly sensitive. We all are very aware of
that. This footage is already withheld under existing
statutory grounds due to privacy and commercial sensitivity.
However, the absence of a clear legislative exclusion
creates ongoing certainty and requires repeated case-by-case
assessment, consuming time and public resource to reach the same outcome.
You may hear that these proposed changes will erode transparency and
public confidence in commercial fishing. No and no.
The government, including our fisheries regulator, and at least 17
other government agencies, will have ongoing access to the
footage as required. Moreover, the data will
still be available to the public, just not the footage itself.
Do we support this bill in its entirety? No, we do not.
For example, we don't consider a time
limit for judicial review is necessary, and we think that the
penalty for the release of camera footage may be excessive.
So, in conclusion, before we move to questions, there has been a lot of noise about
this bill. Sadly, much of it is ill-informed or
inaccurate.
Please look at what this bill actually does.
It modernizes our approaches, and it enables us to act earlier
using the real-time verified data, which wasn't
envisaged when the Fisheries Act 1996 came into being.
And it results in us being able to make better decisions for our fisheries.
So we urge you to support this bill, and we urge you now to ask us questions which
enable you to do so. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
We have a question from Rachel Boyack.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Lisa and team. Appreciate the submission.
I just want to come to top of page six of your submission because this is something
that's coming up in submissions from
industry reps, but also from environmental organizations around
abundance.
And there seems to be quite a difference in opinion on the use of this frame.
And so I'm just interested in your interpretation of abundance and how
that applies to the TAC settings. And so how you see that as a
beneficial
thing. And I guess if there's any response you've got to
raising concerns that using abundance as the primary measure.
I'm trying to remember the context of that paragraph.
So that part is in relation to clarifying that
the scope of the TAC is around managing
the stock's abundance
in a QMA level.
Mm.
And I guess the term abundance in there is just to say
that's about managing how much fish there is there.
But that isn't necessarily meaning that you're going to not
consider all the things that would affect that abundance.
Mm-hmm.
But really, it's just about
making sure that when we're setting a catch limit for a stock,
that that's what we're looking at there-
Right
... is how much fish is there, and so therefore how much can be
taken.
Yeah.
Because there seems to be some, yeah, just to supplement, there seems to be some
concern, I guess that it doesn't reflect sustainability, it doesn't
reflect
other outcomes, I guess. And so I'm just wondering,
and I mean, this is probably a question more for officials when we get into the
detail, if there's other ways of framing it that are clear
what you also take into consideration in order to
assess the abundance of the stock, if that makes sense.
Yeah, I think the TAC is about the abundance of the stock, and the thing that I've
heard at least Raewyn raise, and might be a part of this question, is the wider
environmental considerations as part of making that decision.
Yeah, so just a reminder, the environmental principles of the act
aren't changing, right? They're still there. They underpin absolutely everything.
We were talking about this earlier and the kind of example that came to mind is if
you have a healthy fishery and the fish stock is absolutely fine, but there's some
environmental issues. Say you are seeing an increase in seabird bycatch.
You don't change the TAC to manage the seabird bycatch.
You look at what tool appropriately manages seabird bycatch.
What can actually be effective to bringing it down?
And so I think that's kind of where that conversation is.
What is the tool for the actual job?
If it's about fish abundance, the catch limit probably is the right tool.
Mm-hmm.
If it's something else, then what is the actual tool?
As opposed to trying to do it kind of by proxy through catch limits
As Sue says an-
Well, it's kind of a sup because you talked about that you've got the management
tools have got much better, and you've now got access to timely, accurate, and
independent data, and that's great.
But we have had people mention their concern about the catch
per uni- unit. What is it? The catch per unit-
Catch per unit effort
... effort determining the health of the fish stocks.
So,
yeah, I guess my question sort of follows on from you.
Do you think that's a good measure in terms of if we are going to increase
levels of catch, if that's the best measure to be using?
I think what I would say is, so catch per unit effort
is, it's not the gold star if you can get
something better. If you cannot, like if you've got a fish stock that's really low
value, you can't afford to do a survey, or it doesn't survey well, it's better than
nothing, right? And there are some instances where catch per
unit effort is you really shouldn't be using it.
Particular instances, like if you have a highly aggregated species,
or if you have fishers running around trying to avoid catch because the catch on it
is very low. It's not very useful then.
But there is a number of
situations where it's very, very useful.
If fishers aren't even particularly trying to catch it or they behave the same year
after year, it gives you a good signal of what's going on out on the water.
And particularly now that we've got the cameras on board, the fisher reported data
about what they're catching and per effort basically, is
verified by that camera data, camera information, sorry.
So if you watch it on camera, you can tell what they're fishing.
And they don't know when it's being checked, so they will always be reporting
really well. The incentive is very strong for them to report everything,
which means you have a lot more,
there's a lot more credibility, should I say, to the catch
reporting you're doing.
Right. And you've got other tools in the basket that also help you do it.
Yeah.
But I think it, globally it's used. It's used a lot in fisheries management.
Thank you very much.
Steve.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's not clear that our committee's gonna recommend the passage of this bill.
Parties from government side and the opposition side of the House have
indicated that we don't think the bill's a good idea, and perhaps we won't
recommend it.
How critical is it-- What are the critical bits of this that you
think need to be protected from your perspective?
And how much of a material problem is it
for you if we don't pass this legislation
as it's currently drafted?
Well, we've highlighted three of the
most important. We've got a range of areas, but management procedures,
monitored returns, and the protection of the raw footage from
camera data would be three areas that we strongly support.
It is a problem for us if those areas and other
pieces of the bill don't pass because they are an improvement.
They provide more tools in the toolbox so that we can ensure
sustainability of the resource. That's the bottom line.
So for us,
we see this as net positive for the fishery and for all users
of it because it enables us to use that data, you've just referred to it,
that we didn't have when the bill, when the act first came into
being in 1996. We now have all of that information, and we need to be able to
use it. And therefore, the incremental positive
changes that have happened up until now and then further change with the bill,
they're really important for the fishery.
I mean, the team might have some more specifics.
Can I just add one other thing that, I wouldn't call it barrier, but in this
bill there's also a
fixing of a current legislative cliff, I think it's called.
Yes.
Which is the current expiry of all of the ability to put fish back
at the end of September 2026.
That would be hugely problematic at this point.
And-
That's following the shift in po- I was going to ask-
Yeah, so that's-
That's following the shift in policy direction from 2022.
Yeah. So that's the '22 changes to the bill.
Yes. I was going to ask about that, yeah.
Yeah. And that would be a significant problem if it didn't go through.
And not even just from an operational perspective, from the fact that you're not
putting live fish back in the sea when you really should be.
Mm-hmm.
So that would be a big one that we would want to see go somewhere.
No, thank you. Thanks for clarifying that.
And it really is that continuation of reform since
2016. So it's that natural next step
after
changing legislative frameworks and then implementation of the
better reporting and data collecting tools to then not update your
toolbox to respond to that information would be, I think,
a lost opportunity really.
Mm-hmm.
Because, and it follows on also from the 2021 Prime
Minister's Chief Science Advisor report, which talked about information
and noted that while we have a lot of it, we can never
expect it all to be perfect, and there always will be uncertainty.
But there was a recommendation to make better use of that data, and so that's just
following on again from those recommendations.
Steve. So just for clarity, you don't support landing bycatch because you
do see it as a penalty to industry?
The purpose of commercial-- Well, what commercial fishers are trying to do, right,
is maximize the value sustainably.
So it's in their best interest to land absolutely every fish that they can,
right, if they can sell it. But if you can't sell it, the removal of it
from the marine ecosystem and the food web and all of that kind of stuff for no end
purpose, incentivize it, absolutely do not catch this.
But it becomes a kind of a,
help me with the word. There's kind of no purpose to it.
You're just removing protein from the marine food web.
Sorry, just to clarify that, but the argument is that
requiring bycatch to be landed acted as a penalty and a
disincentive to that bycatch, and recognizing that some fish may
survive being caught, but a lot of fish won't survive being caught.
So dumping dead fish at sea,
is an easier option for industry than making industry land it.
It reduces the need to take fish to landfill once it's brought to
land.
So you don't support
requiring the fishery to bring bycatch to land, because you do see it as
a penalty?
Yes.
I think it's an excessive penalty above what is already
there. So,
even without regulatory incentives, there is no business in catching
fish that you can't sell. And then on top of that, you have all of the
operational costs of having to deal with that fish.
And so commercial fishers are professional fishers, and they do their best
already to reduce that as much as possible in the way that their
gear is set up or where they fish.
Any fishing activity, whether it's commercial or recreational,
you're going to sometimes catch fish that you weren't intending to, and it might be
a different size or it might be just the wrong species.
Yeah.
That happens, so you do your best to reduce that.
So there's already an incentive naturally there not to want to
catch these fish.
Then on top of that, we have the requirement that if fish is dead,
that has to be balanced with ACE. And that came in the 2022 changes, and that was
supported by industry-
Oh, right
... noting that
this would change the rules for some things, like the small fish,
that would add an extra cost. It was still supported because
even with the additional cost, that is better management.
That should be
covered with a cost because that is dead fish and it should be in
the management system.
However, we thought that then the additional requirement to bring it to
land was an
excessively
punitive, considering all of the other incentives that were in place,
and that it's just better to return this fish to the marine ecosystem
rather than bring it to shore and landfill.
And also the concern about bringing small fish to land.
Yeah.
Got it. Okay. Thank you.
You talked about public consultation
when decisions are made.
Could you give the committee a sense of how that process works?
So I think we talked about in respect of management procedures.
Yes.
Yeah.
An appropriately developed management procedure should undergo
testing to show that it's robust to uncertainty.
So it says, if you got this little bit wrong, but adjusting the catch limit like
this will retain you, will keep you above your management target.
That would all be formed ideally in consultation.
To be honest, they're unlikely to be used in some of the really close shared
fisheries because it's going to be really difficult.
But what you should do is develop the management procedure, which sets out
exactly how you will respond. If you see this on the water, this is what the
response will be. And that entire rule would then be subject to public
consultation.
Right up front, everyone has a say on how you
react when you see a signal. And
one of the things in the best practice, it's in the UN Fish Stocks Agreement, it's
in the FAO code of conduct for responsible fisheries, you want to be doing this
sort of transparent front-ending decision so that you take out
the lobbying and the kind of
uncertainty each time you need to make a decision when you see a signal.
It's front-loaded and everyone has their say that this is how we're going to manage
our fisheries. This is what we're aiming for.
This is how we react when something changes.
It's upfront, right, instead of arguing about down the road.
But full public consultation, absolutely.
And you would want to be developing it
in conjunction with
interested parties.
Is that happening with management practices now then?
I was thinking about this earlier.
At the moment, because management procedures aren't enabled by the act,
they are but they're also kind of not-
Compulsory
... yeah. It's kind of not compulsory.
And also, I think part of the bill, the benefit, and we've made some drafting
suggestions, I think, to help with this, but that safeguarding and that kind of
breakout rules as they're often called when something doesn't go right.
Having that very clear as an expectation and a requirement gives a
lot of confidence, right, that we are going to have management procedures that
work, and if it looks like they're not, we can step out of it.
But at the moment, they kind of exist in this
little gray area where we kind of have them, but we still consult on what
they say, and people don't really know about them because they don't kind of exist.
So I think putting them in the legislation with appropriate
safeguards would be such a big step forward for us as a country.
Yeah.
Right. Thank you very much. We've come to time.
Appreciate your efforts today. And,
as I said earlier, the committee will
take all this into consideration when we're deliberating.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Thank you. Very nice to be here. Thank you.
Thank you.